RFC: Finalize syntax for slice patterns with subslices (#2359)
rust-lang/rfcs: text/0000-subslice-pattern-syntax.md

- Feature Name: slice_patterns
- Start Date: 2018-03-08
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Use an obvious syntax for subslice patterns - `..` and `..PAT`.  
If syntactic ambiguities arise in the future, always disambiguate in favor of subslice patterns.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

## General motivation
Stabilization of slice pattern with subslices is currently blocked on finalizing syntax for
these subslices.  
This RFC proposes a syntax for stabilization.

## Motivation for the specific syntax

### The shortcut form: `..`

This form is already used in the meaning "rest of the list" in struct patterns, tuple struct
patterns and tuple patterns so it would be logical to use it for slice patterns as well.  
And indeed, in unstable Rust `..` is used in this meaning since long before 1.0.

### The full form: `..PAT` or `PAT..`

If `..` is used in the meaning "match the subslice (`>=0` elements) and ignore it", then it's
reasonable to expect that syntax for "match the subslice to a pattern" should be some variation
on `..`.  
The two simplest variations are `..PAT` and `PAT..`.

#### Ambiguity

> The issue is that these syntaxes are ambiguous with half-bounded ranges `..END` and `BEGIN..`.  

Reviewer: The same ambiguity exists for `..` as well (meaning RangeFull).

If ambiguity with some other syntactic construction arises in the future, disambiguation will be
performed in favor of the subslice pattern.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

None known.

# Rationale and alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

The `PAT..` alternative was discussed in the motivational part of the RFC.

More complex syntaxes derived from `..` are possible, they use additional tokens to avoid the
ambiguity with ranges, for example
[`..PAT..`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/23121#issuecomment-301485132), or
`.. @ PAT` or `PAT @ ..` (original comments seem to be lost by GitHub), or other similar
alternatives.  
We reject these syntaxes because they only bring benefits in incredibly contrived cases using a
feature that doesn't even exist yet, but normally they only add symbolic noise.

More radical syntax changes not keeping consistency with `..`, for example
[`[1, 2, 3, 4] ++ ref v`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/23121#issuecomment-289220169).

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

Some other languages like Scala or F# has list/array patterns, but their
syntactic choices are quite different from Rust's general style.

> 

Reviewer 2: Another language you might want to mention / look at is Haskell:
+ https://stackoverflow.com/questions/35378922/pattern-match-list-with-exactly-2-elements-in-haskell
+ https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Haskell/Pattern_matching

### The shortcut form: `..`

This form is already used in the meaning "rest of the list" in struct patterns, tuple struct
patterns and tuple patterns so it would be logical to use it for slice patterns as well.  
And indeed, in unstable Rust `..` is used in this meaning since long before 1.0.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

Sub-slices and sub-arrays can be matched using `..` and `<IDENT> @ ..` can be used to bind
these sub-slices and sub-arrays to an identifier.

```rust
// Matching slices using `ref` patterns:
let v = vec![1, 2, 3];
match v[..] {
    [1, ref subslice @ .., 4] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 1),
    [5, ref subslice @ ..] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2),
    [ref subslice @ .., 6] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2),
    [x, .., y] => assert!(v.len() >= 2),
    [..] => {} // Always matches
}

// Matching slices using default-binding-modes:
let v = vec![1, 2, 3];
match &v[..] {
    [1, subslice @ .., 4] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 1),
    [5, subslice @ ..] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2),
    [subslice @ .., 6] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2),
    [x, .., y] => assert!(v.len() >= 2),
    [..] => {} // Always matches

> }

Reviewer 2: Include examples with `ref mut` and `&mut v` as well.

// Matching arrays by-value:
let v = [1, 2, 3];
match v {
  [1, subarray @ .., 3] => assert_eq!(subarray, [2]),
  [5, subarray @ ..] => has_type::<[i32; 2]>(subarray),
  [subarray @ .., 6] => has_type::<[i32, 2]>(subarray),
  [x, .., y] => has_type::<[i32, 1]>(x),
  [..] => {},
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: And what about `let v = [1, 2, 3]; match &mut? v { ... }`? -- It would be good to state whether that is allowed and what types the bindings have (e.g. `has_type::<&mut? [i32; 2]>(subarray)` and such).

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

`..` can be used as a pattern fragment for matching sub-slices and sub-arrays.
It is treated as a "non-reference-pattern" for the purpose of determining default-binding-modes,
and so shifts the binding mode to by-`ref` or by-`ref mut` when used to match a subsection of a
reference or mutable reference to a slice or array.

`@` can be used to bind the result of `..` to an identifier.

 When used to match against a non-reference slice (`[u8]`), `x @ ..` would attempt to bind
by-value, which would fail in the case that users haven't enabled `feature(unsized_locals)`

> (since otherwise it's not possible to bind `[u8]` to a variable directly).

Reviewer 2: Include an example of this in the guide level explanation also.

Author: `feature(unsized_locals)` doesn't make it compile, so I removed its mention.

`..`/`IDENT @ ..` is not a full pattern syntax, but rather a part of slice, tuple and tuple

> struct pattern syntaxes. In particular, `..` is not accepted by the `pat` macro matcher.

Reviewer 2: So then it is not clear to me what the syntax is... ISTM that we have something like:
```rust
Pat =
  | // everything else in the pattern grammar...
  | Slice:{ "[" elems:SubPat* % "," ","? "]" }
  | Tuple:{ "(" fields:SubPat* % "," ","? ")" }
  | TupleStruct:{ path:Path "(" fields:SubPat* % "," ","? ")" }
  ;

Ref = "ref" mut:"mut"?;
SlicePatBinding = ref:Ref? ident:IDENT;
SlicePat = {binding:SlicePatBinding "@"}? "..";

SubPat =
  | Slice:SlicePat
  | Pat:Pat
  ;
```
Is that correct? ISTM that it would be cleaner to make `..` into a full pattern and then reject what we don't want semantically. If we allow `..` to be a full pattern, macro authors can also make use of `..` for their own DSL purposes.

If correct, you should also give semantics (including what the types are) for `{ref mut?}? x @ ..` in tuples and tuple structs or specify that they are semantically rejected.

Author: The goal is to keep status quo and make only changes necessary for stabilization of slice patterns.
`..` is a fragment of the slice, tuple, tuple struct and struct pattern syntaxes.
`ref? mut? IDENT @ ..` is a fragment of the slice pattern syntax only.
Duplicate `..`s are also rejected at syntactic level, there are no semantic errors.

Author: >The RFC states that let (x, y @ ..) = expr; and let Struct(x, y @ ..) = expr; are allowed syntactically

Where?
If something looks like it states that, then it needs to be fixed.

Reviewer 2: Line 89; 
> `..`/`IDENT @ ..` is not a full pattern syntax, but rather a part of slice, tuple and tuple
struct pattern syntaxes.

From this follows that `(x, y @ ..)` is legal or at best it is ambiguous.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

None known.

# Rationale and alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

More complex syntaxes derived from `..` are possible, they use additional tokens to avoid the
ambiguity with ranges, for example
[`..PAT..`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/23121#issuecomment-301485132), or
[`.. @ PAT`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/23121#issuecomment-280920062) or
[`PAT @ ..`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/23121#issuecomment-280906823), or other
similar alternatives.  

> We reject these syntaxes because they only bring benefits in incredibly contrived cases using a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We reject these syntaxes because they only bring benefits in contrived cases using a
```

feature that doesn't even exist yet, but normally they only add symbolic noise.

> More radical syntax changes not keeping consistency with `..`, for example

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
More radical syntax changes do not keep consistency with `..`, for example
```
Sentence was hard to read...

[`[1, 2, 3, 4] ++ ref v`](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/23121#issuecomment-289220169).

### `..PAT` or `PAT..`

If `..` is used in the meaning "match the subslice (`>=0` elements) and ignore it", then it's
reasonable to expect that syntax for "match the subslice to a pattern" should be some variation
on `..`.  
The two simplest variations are `..PAT` and `PAT..`.

#### Ambiguity

The issue is that these syntaxes are ambiguous with half-bounded ranges `..END` and `BEGIN..`.  
To be precise, such ranges are not currently supported in patterns, but they may be supported in
the future.

Syntactic ambiguity is not inherently bad. We see it every day in expressions like
`a + b * c`. What is important is to disambiguate it reasonably by default and have a way to
group operands in the alternative way when default disambiguation turns out to be incorrect.  

> In case of slice patterns the subslice interpretation seems overwhelmingly more likely, so we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case of slice patterns the subslice interpretation seems more likely, so we
```

can take it as a default.  

> There was no visible demand for implementing half-bounded ranges in patterns so far, but if they

Reviewer 2: Not so: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/issues/947

are implemented in the future they will be able to be used in slice patterns as well, but they

> will require explicit grouping with recently implemented

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
could require explicit grouping with recently implemented
```
Why set such a requirement today?

[parentheses in patterns](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/48500) (`[a, (..end)]`) or an
explicitly written start boundary (`[a, 0 .. end]`).  
We can also make *some* disambiguation effort and, for example, interpret `..LITERAL` as a
range because `LITERAL` can never match a subslice. Time will show if such an effort is necessary
or not.

> If/when half-bounded ranges are supported in patterns, for better future compatibility we'll need

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If/when half-bounded ranges are supported in patterns, for better future compatibility we could decide
```
As above, I don't think we should make such commitments since it seems rather ad-hoc.

to reserve `..PAT` as "rest of the list" in tuples and tuple structs as well, and avoid interpreting
it as a range pattern in those positions.

Note that ambiguity with unbounded ranges as they are used in expressions (`..`) already exists in

> variant `Variant(..)` and tuple `(a, b, ..)` patterns, but it's very unlikely that the `..` syntax

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
variant `Variant(..)` and tuple `(a, b, ..)` patterns, but it's unlikely that the `..` syntax
```

will ever be used in patterns in the range meaning because it duplicates functionality of the
wildcard pattern `_`.

#### `..PAT` vs `PAT..`

Originally Rust used syntax `..PAT` for subslice patterns.  
In 2014 the syntax was changed to `PAT..` by [RFC 202](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/202).
That RFC received almost no discussion before it got merged and its motivation is no longer
relevant because arrays now use syntax `[T; N]` instead of `[T, ..N]` used in old Rust.

This RFC originally proposed to switch back to `..PAT`.

> Some reasons to switch:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some reasons to switch were:
```

- Symmetry with expressions.  
One of the general ideas behind patterns is that destructuring with
patterns has the same syntax as construction with expressions, if possible.  
In expressions we already have something with the meaning "rest of the list" - functional record
update in struct expressions `S { field1, field2, ..remaining_fields }`.
Right now we can use `S { field1, field1, .. }` in a pattern, but can't bind the remaining fields
as a whole (by creating a new struct type on the fly, for example). It's not inconceivable that

> in Rust 2525 we have such ability and it's reasonable to expect it using syntax `..remaining_fields`

Reviewer 2: What's the significance of 2525...?

Author: This was a [reference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=izQB2-Kmiic).

symmetric to expressions. It would be good for slice patterns to be consistent with it.  
Without speculations, even if `..remaining_fields` in struct expressions and `..subslice` in slice
patterns are not entirely the same thing, they are similar enough to keep them symmetric already.
- Simple disambiguation.  
When we are parsing a slice pattern and see `..` we immediately know it's
a subslice and can parse following tokens as a pattern (unless they are `,` or `]`, then it's just
`..`, without an attached pattern).  
With `PAT..` we need to consume the pattern first, but that pattern may be a... `RANGE_BEGIN..`
range pattern, then it means that we consumed too much and need to reinterpret the parsed tokens
somehow. It's probably possible to make this work, but it's some headache that we would like to
avoid if possible.

> This RFC no longer includes the addition of `..PAT` or `PAT..`, but merely `..` as it results in

Reviewer 2: This "merely `..`" isn't really true based on the grammar above... it would be true if `..` was an actual pattern.

a smaller starting surface-area for the feature which can be expanded in the future if necessary.

> The currently-proposed change is an extremely minimal addition to patterns (`..` for slices) which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The currently-proposed change is a minimal addition to patterns (`..` for slices) which
```
"extremely" is extremely redundant ;)

    [5, subslice @ ..] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2), // typeof(subslice) == &[i32]
    [subslice @ .., 6] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2), // typeof(subslice) == &[i32]
    [x, .., y] => assert!(v.len() >= 2),
    [..] => {} // Always matches
}
match &mut v[..] {
    [1, subslice @ .., 4] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 1), // typeof(subslice) == &mut [i32]
    [5, subslice @ ..] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2), // typeof(subslice) == &mut [i32]
    [subslice @ .., 6] => assert_eq!(subslice.len(), 2), // typeof(subslice) == &mut [i32]
    [x, .., y] => assert!(v.len() >= 2),
    [..] => {} // Always matches
}

// Matching slices by value (error):
let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3];
match v[..] {
    [x @ ..] => {} // ERROR cannot move out of type `[i32]`, a non-copy slice
}

// Matching arrays by-value and by reference (explicitly or using default-binding-modes):
let mut v = [1, 2, 3];
match v {
  [1, subarray @ .., 3] => assert_eq!(subarray, [2]), // typeof(subarray) == [i32; 1]
  [5, subarray @ ..] => has_type::<[i32; 2]>(subarray), // typeof(subarray) == [i32; 2]
  [subarray @ .., 6] => has_type::<[i32, 2]>(subarray), // typeof(subarray) == [i32; 2]

>   [x, .., y] => has_type::<[i32, 1]>(x), // typeof(subarray) == [i32; 1]

Reviewer 2: A typo in this line? `x: i32` should hold here and there's no `subarray` in scope.

  [..] => {},
}
match v {
  [1, ref subarray @ .., 3] => assert_eq!(subarray, [2]), // typeof(subarray) == &[i32; 1]
  [5, ref subarray @ ..] => has_type::<&[i32; 2]>(subarray), // typeof(subarray) == &[i32; 2]
  [ref subarray @ .., 6] => has_type::<&[i32, 2]>(subarray), // typeof(subarray) == &[i32; 2]

>   [x, .., y] => has_type::<&[i32, 1]>(x), // typeof(subarray) == &[i32; 1]

Reviewer 2: Same here but `x: &i32`?

  [..] => {},
}
match &mut v {
  [1, subarray @ .., 3] => assert_eq!(subarray, [2]), // typeof(subarray) == &mut [i32; 1]
  [5, subarray @ ..] => has_type::<&mut [i32; 2]>(subarray), // typeof(subarray) == &mut [i32; 2]
  [subarray @ .., 6] => has_type::<&mut [i32, 2]>(subarray), // typeof(subarray) == &mut [i32; 2]

>   [x, .., y] => has_type::<&mut [i32, 1]>(x), // typeof(subarray) == &mut [i32; 1]

Reviewer 2: and here but `x: &mut i32`?
